The development of a human embryo can go awry1 in many different ways. One of the most common types of birth defects that afflict yet unborn children are referred to as neural tube defects (NTDs). A premise for the development of NTDs lies in an incomplete closure of a neural tube, a precursor2 to the human central nervous system that forms from an embryo’s nervous tissue3 over the course of a normal development. As a result, an opening remains in the developing spine or cranium4 of the fetus, which, depending on its severity, can fully disrupt the growth of the nervous system. Neural tube defects affect either the development of the brain, or spine, or both. Most of the conditions that stem from NTDs are usually untreatable, leave the person largely disabled, and have an extremely high mortality rate.

Anencephaly is a NTD that in broadest terms means the complete absence of the cerebrum5, the largest part of the brain responsible for senses and cognition. The causes of the condition are still unclear, but it is speculated that it can be triggered by a folic acid deficiency and certain types of diabetes in pregnant women. Abortion is strongly encouraged when anencephaly is detected via ultrasound. Anencephalic children are usually either stillborn6, or die from cardiorespiratory arrest mere hours or a few days after the birth.

Nevertheless, there were some cases of anencephaly that truly stood out from the rest. One of such cases was of Stephanie Keene (name was probably changed due to privacy concerns) dubbed as Baby K.

Stephanie was diagnosed with anencephaly long before her birth. Her mother has chosen to keep the child due to her belief as a Christian that all life should be protected.

The doctors and the nurses both strongly advocated for a DNR order7 for the baby, but the mother refused yet again. Over the course of six months after the birth Stephanie has travelled from hospital to a hospital and was kept under a ventilator all this time. Eventually a hospital has filed a lawsuit against Stephanie’s mother, aiming to appoint a legal guardian in her place, and trying to receive a legal confirmation that the hospital couldn’t be held responsible for Stephanie’s health and would opt out8 of any services to her save for palliative caregiving.

And, in a very controversial ruling, the hospital has lost that case. The court has ruled that Stephanie is to be put under a mechanical ventilator and be given other care if any sort of other medical emergency would have arisen. The court has also made a notion that they ruled according to existing laws, without any regard to the rather unusual condition that Stephanie had.

Thus Baby K has lived 2 years and 174 days. Her heart had stopped on April 5, 1995. Keeping her heart beating had cost over 500,000$, a sum, as some would argue, that could’ve been spent on research aimed to prevent NTDs or, possibly, treatment of other newborn children.