Game theory can be explained broadly as a study of behaviour of rational beings in cooperative and non-cooperative decision making. It’s a relatively new field of science that emerged in the second half of the 20th century. Globalization of economics, advent of nuclear weaponry and emergence1 of computers were all major milestones in the history of humanity, and each subsequently2 dictated the need to formalize at least the most common trade and war strategies.

A game is usually defined as a process involving two or more actors3, each of them having something to gain or lose through their actions after the game is finished (or ‘solved’). Thus, the definition applies to most of the regular games (like, for example, poker), but can be broadened as necessary to cover multitudes of other situations, both real and hypothetical. The action is presumed to be taken by a ‘rational agent’ - that is, an actor that acts consistently and always chooses an action that is the most optimal in terms of loss/gain ratio according to his current position. A game can be cooperative or non-cooperative, allowing or disallowing willing alliances between the participants respectively.

The study of cooperative games usually focuses on why and how the coalitions form, and what actions the members of any coalition would take at any given time. The study of non-cooperative games instead focuses on individual players and on finding a solution called Nash equilibrium4.

Nash equilibrium is a state of a game in which no player, knowing the strategies of other players, can change his own strategy to better his own odds while the other strategies are unchanged. Essentially, this means that all of the players have found the best possible (or ‘optimal’) outcome of the game for themselves, given the current rules and circumstances. Mathematician John Forbes Nash, who was an author of the concept, proved that this equilibrium is possible to find for any finite game.

One of the most famous examples of finding Nash equilibrium is a thought experiment called Prisoner’s dilemma. Suppose there are two prisoners interrogated5 in two different prison cells. They have no way to communicate with each other, but each of them knows that the other is also interrogated. Each prisoner is sentenced to one year in prison. Each prisoner is then offered a deal: if he testifies6 against the other, he is set free, while the other gets a harsher, 3-year penalty. However, if both prisoners testify against each other, both of them will get a harder sentence, and both will serve 2 years in prison. Each prisoner can choose either to testify or to remain silent. What is the optimal course of action for each prisoner?

According to game theory, a rational actor would choose to leave prison, condemning7 the other prisoner. Thus Nash equilibrium in this situation (and the most optimal outcome) would be reached if both prisoners tried to betray each other and subsequently each served 2 years.

Knowledge that in any situation with something to gain or lose there is indeed an optimal course of action with maximized profits for any and all participants has very wide implications8. Finding it might be hard, but the willingness to do that, perhaps, can make us able to stop the wars and other major threats to our society.

For his works in game theory, John Nash was awarded a Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences back in 1994, 45 years after actually writing them down. As of 2020, Nash is the only person ever to be awarded both this prize and the Abel Prize in mathematics, which he was awarded in 2015.